Feature/mongo db europe2018 (#456)
ordina-jworks/ordina-jworks.github.io: _posts/2018-11-06-mongodb-europe-018.md

---
layout: post
authors: [chris_de_bruyne, nick_van_hoof, jan_van_der_veken, dock]
title: "MongoDB Europe 2018"
image: /img/2018-11-08-mongodb-europe-2018/main-image-mdbe.png
tags: [Development,MongoDB,DBA,Data,Kubernetes,Conference]
category: Development
comments: true
---

> MongoDB Europe is a yearly conference where MongoDB shows of their latest features and new products.
> This year the venue took place in Old Billingsgate Walk, London.

> > This blog post summarizes several of the given sessions.

Reviewer: done

8. [MongoDB Enterprise Operator for Kubernetes at Amadeus](#mongodb-enterprise-operator-for-kubernetes-at-amadeus)
9. [MongoDB Charts](#mongodb-charts)
10. [Closing](#closing)

# Atlas
([MongoDB Atlas for your Enterprise](https://sched.co/FmAF){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}, Vladislava Stevanovic & Veronica Tudor)

With Atlas MongoDB brings us DBaaS (Database As A Service).
You can run your database in the cloud with the cloud provider of your choice.
Multiple options to secure your database are built in by default.
Backups are taken automatically.

### Getting started
It is very easy to get started since a free tier is provided for everyone and you can deploy with the cloud provider of your choice (Azure , GCP, AWS).
A cluster can be started for free in just a few clicks.

<div style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="/img/2018-11-08-mongodb-europe-2018/create-mongodb-atlas-cluster.png" width="100%">
</div>

Start your own cluster: [https://cloud.mongodb.com](https://cloud.mongodb.com){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}

### Cloud
MongoDB Atlas is a cross-platform database. 
You can run it on Amazon Web Services, Google Cloud or Microsoft Azure. 

> It provides you an availability map that shows you which users are served from where an what latency should be expected.

Reviewer: done

They wanted to get the data while it's hot, not in hourly or daily (or worse...) batches.
They decided to use MongoDB to build up this materialised view of all different data streams, and Atlas to be able to focus on the application and not the database administration.

The vast majority of the data resides in MsSql databases.
Extraction happens with Kafka Connect SQL CDC to generate a stream of all create, update and delete operations into a stream and push it to Kafka.
All with a simple piece of configuration like this : 

```json
{
  "name" : "msSqlSourceConnector1",
  "config" : {
    "connector.class" : "io.confluent.connect.cdc.mssql.MsSqlSourceConnector",
    "tasks.max" : "1",
    "initial.database" : "testing",
    "username" : "cdc",
    "password" : "secret",
    "server.name" : "db-01.example.com",
    "server.port" : "1433"
  }
}
```

They use Avro for the schema definition in combination with a schema-registry.
Interested clients can then read the data of the topics and do their single-view-thing on the data and save it to MongoDB.
The view is being build up, message per message.

> The view in  MongoDB is then pushed back to Kafka as another stream to provide this data to interested parties.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Afterwards this view in  MongoDB is then pushed back to Kafka as another stream to provide this data to interested parties.
```

The following yaml file is all you need to spin up a 3 node replica set :

```yaml
apiVersion: mongodb.com/v1
kind: MongoDbReplicaSet
metadata:
  name: myReplicaSet
  namespace: mongodb
spec:
  members: 3
  version: 4.0.1

  project: projectName
  credentials: myUberSecretCredentials
```

I kid you not, that's it.

Scale out or back in with a simple change in the config yaml and 
```bash
cubectl apply -f file.yaml
```

# MongoDB Charts
- [Bringing Data to Life with MongoDB Charts](https://sched.co/FtWP), Guillaume Meister.

Currently, if you want to visualize data in a MongoDB database, you either have to code it yourself or rely on a 3rd party tool and migrate your data to a different platform (for example: Kibana with Elasticsearch is a popular tool).
Needless to say that this can be quite cumbersome.
MongoDB Charts intends to solve this.

So what is it? MongoDB Charts is a visualization tool that runs as a standalone webserver, you access it via a web browser.

In Charts, you define data sources by pointing to a collection or view on a MongoDB instance.
Then you can create all kinds of visualizations based on the data source, using various aggregation and filter functions.

> Finally, you can combine charts into dashboards with a customized layout, and you can share them with other users.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, you can combine charts into dashboards with a customized layout and you can share them with other users.
```

A picture is worth a thousand words, so to give you a better idea of what it is all about, let's look at an animation of Charts in action:

<div style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="/img/2018-11-08-mongodb-europe-2018/mongodb-charts-01.gif" width="100%">
</div>

> Charts is still in beta, but you can already try it out. MongoDB provides a docker image that you can [download](https://www.mongodb.com/download-center/charts) via the MongoDB download center.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Charts is still in beta but you can already try it out. 
MongoDB provides a docker image that you can [download](https://www.mongodb.com/download-center/charts) via the MongoDB download center.
```

Multiple options to secure your database are built in by default.
Backups are taken automatically.

### Getting started
It is very easy to get started since a free tier is provided for everyone and you can deploy with the cloud provider of your choice (Azure , GCP, AWS).
A cluster can be started for free in just a few clicks.

<div style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="/img/2018-11-08-mongodb-europe-2018/create-mongodb-atlas-cluster.png" width="100%">
</div>

Start your own cluster: [https://cloud.mongodb.com](https://cloud.mongodb.com){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}

### Cloud
MongoDB Atlas is a cross-platform database. 
You can run it on Amazon Web Services, Google Cloud or Microsoft Azure. 
It provides you an availability map that shows you which users are served from where an what latency should be expected.
<div style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="/img/2018-11-08-mongodb-europe-2018/global-clusters.png" width="100%">
</div>

### Scalability
When your database grows it is easy to scale up or out.
You can scale up by increasing the size of the instance on which your database runs.
Scaling out is done by the process of sharding.

> Here we are storing data of the same collection across multiple Replica Sets to decrease the size of the partition and increase read-write performance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here we are storing data of the same collection across multiple smaller partitions so we can distribute these partitions over multiple machines and increase read-write performance.
```

This way you do not run into the limitations of a single server.

To ensure that MongoDB stores data equally across shards you need the right strategy of choosing a partition key.

### High availability 
To ensure maximum uptime the procedure to recover from instance failures is completely automated.
When a primary node goes down, a new primary is chosen immediately by the system of voting.
All nodes vote on who should become the new primary. 
The node with the majority of the votes becomes the new primary.

> A general guideline is to have a replica set that consists of one primary node and at least two secondary nodes.

Reviewer 2: move this line as first under ### High availabiltiy

The courses are ideal to get you started or to deepen your knowledge when you want to be more advanced.
If you want you can even get certified!
I speak from my own experience when I say that the University platform is great to work with and the courses are well taught.
Find all available resources here: [https://university.mongodb.com/](https://university.mongodb.com/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}.

# Compass Aggregation Pipeline Builder
(General Session Keynote)

Recently the aggregation pipeline builder was introduced in [MongoDB Compass](https://www.mongodb.com/products/compass){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}.
This allows you to create an aggregation pipeline step by step.
And that makes it easy to debug the pipeline along the way.
Let's see an example.  
Suppose I have a collection which contains documents that represent a person.
Here are two examples of elements in the collections:

```json
{
	"_id" : ObjectId("5be40f6e7047ead15753d073"),
	"firstName" : "Didi",
	"lastName" : "Verhoft",
	"birthYear" : 1996
},
{
	"_id" : ObjectId("5be40f6e7047ead15753d074"),
	"firstName" : "Nick",
	"lastName" : "Van Hoof",
	"birthYear" : 1992
}
```

> A person has the fields lastName, firstName and birthYear (and of course for some people more info could be stored).

Author: Here I am hinting on the fact that there is no fixed database schema

  "config" : {
    "connector.class" : "io.confluent.connect.cdc.mssql.MsSqlSourceConnector",
    "tasks.max" : "1",
    "initial.database" : "testing",
    "username" : "cdc",
    "password" : "secret",
    "server.name" : "db-01.example.com",
    "server.port" : "1433"
  }
}
```

They use Avro for the schema definition in combination with a schema-registry.
Interested clients can then read the data of the topics and do their single-view-thing on the data and save it to MongoDB.
The view is being build up, message per message.
Afterwards this view in  MongoDB is then pushed back to Kafka as another stream to provide this data to interested parties.
This avoids locking the data in one place.

To finish it of they shared some lessons learned :
* Watch out for frameworks generating queries.  
   They can create bad performing aggregations or queries.  
   For them it was better to write some queries explicitly.  
* Use custom _id for unique determination of your model, it saves an index and RAM
* Watch out for unbounded document growth.

# [MongoDB Enterprise Operator for Kubernetes at Amadeus](https://sched.co/FmAc){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}

> Amadeus is the world's largest technology company dedicated to the travel industry.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Amadeus](https://amadeus.com/en) is the world's largest technology company dedicated to the travel industry.
```

> They have developed an impressive MongoDB farm - a large environment with 100 clusters, some of which run more than 100 shards, some of which run 100TB MongoDB databases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
They have developed an impressive MongoDB farm, a large environment with 100 clusters.
Some of these clusters run more than 100 shards, while others have 100TB MongoDB databases.
```

Amadeus processes more than 1 trillion availability requests per day. 

> For each single search you do on a website they receive 500.000 availability requests.

Reviewer 2: hier mis ik wat context.
Is dat het zoeken op een boekingssite of iets van een reisbureau?

Reviewer: voldoende als ik gewoon 'flight' ertussen zet

> Amadeus processes more than 1 trillion flight availability requests per day.

Reviewer 2: ja, dat maakt het idd mss wel wat duidelijker

So search responsibly ;-)
The number of requests per day grows by 50% each year.

> Worst day is january 2th due to new years resolutions!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The second of January has by far the most requests, due to new years resolutions!
```

> If this day is in the weekend, all systems are pushed to their limits.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If this day is in the weekend all systems are pushed to their limits.
```

> The fair database for one of their big clients, Kayak, is 100 Tb in size and changes daily.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The fair database for one of their big clients, Kayak, is 100TB in size and changes daily.
```

That's some pretty big numbers there.
No wonder that Amadeus is a happy user of the MongoDB Enterprise Operator for Kubernetes.

Starting with the MongoDB Ops Manager v4.0, MongoDB officially supports the management and deployment of MongoDB in Kubernetes with Backup, Automation, Alerting and Monitoring.

> An operator has app-specific awareness about stateful applications, so it knows how to deploy them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A [MongoDB Enterprise Kubernetes Operator](https://github.com/mongodb/mongodb-enterprise-kubernetes) has app-specific awareness about stateful applications, so it knows how to deploy them.
```

This operator helps automating scripted tasks and enables MongoDB-as-a-service for developers.

> This operator talks to Ops Manager and delegates the creation of clusters, shards, backups and automation to Ops Manager.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It talks to Ops Manager and delegates the creation of clusters, shards, backups and automation to Ops Manager.
```

The underlying necessary Kubernetes infrastructure is orchestrated by the operator itself and so they work in conjunction.
This provides for clusters to be setup, scaled up/down/out/in, with a single simple yaml file.
And kubernetes provides the self-healing capabilities, how nice is that!?

The following yaml file is all you need to spin up a 3 node replica set :

```yaml
apiVersion: mongodb.com/v1
kind: MongoDbReplicaSet
metadata:
  name: myReplicaSet
  namespace: mongodb
spec:
  members: 3
  version: 4.0.1

  project: projectName
  credentials: myUberSecretCredentials
```

I kid you not, that's it.

Scale out or back in with a simple change in the config yaml and 
```bash
cubectl apply -f file.yaml
```

# MongoDB Charts
- [Bringing Data to Life with MongoDB Charts](https://sched.co/FtWP), Guillaume Meister.

> Currently, if you want to visualize data in a MongoDB database, you either have to code it yourself or rely on a 3rd party tool and migrate your data to a different platform (for example: Kibana with Elasticsearch is a popular tool).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently, if you want to visualize data in a MongoDB database you either have to code it yourself, or rely on a 3rd party tool and migrate your data to a different platform (for example: Kibana with Elasticsearch is a popular tool).
```

Needless to say that this can be quite cumbersome.

> MongoDB Charts intends to solve this.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[MongoDB Charts](https://www.mongodb.com/products/charts) intends to solve this.
```

> So what is it? MongoDB Charts is a visualization tool that runs as a standalone webserver, you access it via a web browser.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So what is it? 
MongoDB Charts is a visualization tool that runs as a standalone webserver, you access it via a web browser.
```

> In Charts, you define data sources by pointing to a collection or view on a MongoDB instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Charts you define data sources by pointing to a collection or view on a MongoDB instance.
```

Then you can create all kinds of visualizations based on the data source, using various aggregation and filter functions.

> Finally, you can combine charts into dashboards with a customized layout and you can share them with other users.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, you can combine charts into dashboards with a customized layout and you can share these with other users.
```
